---
abstract: |
    The term marine heat wave (MHW) was first coined in 2013 with no central
    definition having been agreed upon before. This lack of a definition had
    led to an inability of different research groups to compare their
    findings on this phenomenon before 2013. In order to assuage this issue,
    a research team has recently created a definition for MHWs that will be
    valid anywhere in the world. We have taken this algorithm and applied it
    to the *in situ* time series available for the coast of South Africa
    that are longer than 10 years and with at least 90% complete daily
    records. It was also decided to apply the algorithm to cool temperatures
    and investigate the presence of marine cold spells (MCSs). We found that
    MHWs and MCSs can be found along the entire stretch of South Africa’s
    coastline and with some temporal and spatial agreement between the
    largest events detected. MHWs occur more often, last longer than MCSs
    and have greater cumulative intensities. There was little variance in
    the cumulative intensity \[C  days\] around the mean for MHWs and MCSs
    however, several were much larger and there tended to be specific time
    series that displayed more dramatic results than others. The coastline
    was further divided into three sections (west, south, and east) to
    investigate the effect of geography on MHWs and MCSs and it was found
    that the south coast experiences more, longer and more intense MHWs and
    MCSs than the other two coastlines. The mechanism driving the higher
    intensity of events on the south coast, which is much greater than the
    other coasts, requires further study. The largest three MHWs of most
    time series along the coast of South Africa have occurred in the second
    half of the time series whereas the largest three MCSs have occurred in
    the first half. These same calculations were conducted for offshore
    temperatures from NOAA optimally interpolated sea surface temperature
    (OISST) data, too. It was found that the proportion of co-occurrence
    between *in situ* and OISST data ranged from 0.5–0.0 for each coastline
    with co-occurrence rates being the largest on the south coast. Few time
    series showed co-occurrence amongst the 50% largest events.
address:
- |
    Department of Biodiversity and Conservation Biology, University of the
    Western Cape, Private Bag X17, Bellville 7535, South Africa
- |
    ARC Centre of Excellence for Climate System Science, The University of
    New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
- |
    Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania,
    Hobart, Australia
- |
    UWA Oceans Institute and School of Plant Biology, The University of
    Western Australia, Crawley, 6009 Western Australia, Australia
author:
- 'Robert W. Schlegel'
- 'Eric C. J. Oliver'
- 'Thomas W. Wernberg'
- 'Albertus J. Smit'
title: |
    Co-occurrence of marine heat waves and cold spells in nearshore and
    offshore regions along South Africa
---

marine heat waves ,marine cold spells ,OISST ,*in situ* data
,co-occurrence ,climate change ,extreme events ,South Africa ,coastal

Introduction
============

Over the past three decades, global-scale anthropogenically mediated
warming has negatively affected marine and terrestrial realms with far
reaching consequences for humanity and natural ecological functioning.
Although climate change is generally understood as a gradual long-term
rise in global mean surface temperature [@IPCC2014], which will continue
for decades or centuries, it is generally the associated increase in
frequency and severity of extreme events that affects humans and
ecosystems alike in the short-term [@Easterling2000]. Impacts are often
sudden with catastrophic consequences. Such extreme events include
droughts, floods, wind storms, tropical cyclones, heat waves and cold
spells. ‘Pulse’ events exceeding certain thresholds of frequency,
intensity (extremeness), duration, timing and rate of onset (abruptness)
can drive punctuated perturbations to species distributions, which
eventually modify the structure and function of ecosystems
[@Wernberg2013; @Rehage2016], and the recognition to focus more on
events and less on trends has emerged as a recent direction of climate
change research [@Jentsch2007]. The focus of this paper is on marine
thermal events that are extreme with respect to the seasonal
climatology. They may be anomalously warm (marine heat waves, MHW;
*sensu* Hobday et al. 2016), or anomalously cold (marine cold spells,
MCS; introduced here). While MHWs are becoming reasonably well known by
virtue of their increasing frequency and intensity, there is less
information about the ecological effects of extreme cold events. There
is also a paucity of information about their drivers.

The concept of heat waves is usually applied to atmospheric phenomena
where vague definitions such as “a period of abnormally and
uncomfortably hot and usually humid weather” are invoked @Glickman2000,
but there are also precise definitions based on statistical properties
and other metrics of the temperature record that are relative to
location and time of year (e.g. @Meehl2004
[@Alexander2006; @Fischer2010; @Fischer2011]). Recent years have seen
investigations of heat waves in the ocean due to them becoming more
frequent over time (e.g. @Mackenzie2007
[@Selig2010; @Sura2011; @Lima2012; @DeCastro2014]). Well documented
marine heat waves (MHW) have occurred in the Mediterranean in 2003 (e.g.
@Black2004 [@Olita2007; @Garrabou2009]), off the coast of Western
Australia in 2011 (e.g. @Feng2013 [@Pearce2013; @Wernberg2013]), in the
north west Atlantic Ocean in 2012 (e.g. @Mills2012
[@Chen2014; @Chen2015] and now the “Blob” from 2014 to 2016 in the north
east Pacific Ocean @Bond2015. The extreme temperatures from these
events, and others like them, may have wide ranging negative impacts
upon the local ecology for the regions in which they occur. For example,
the 2003 Mediterranean heat wave may have affected up to 80% of the
gorgonian fan colonies in certain areas of this sea @Garrabou2009,
whereas the 2011 event off the west coast of Australia has been
recognized as being a driving factor in the regime shift there from
temperate kelp forests to the beginnings of a coral reef system
@Wernberg2013. Because the inquiry into MHWs is a relatively new
endeavour none of these studies provided adequate definitions for what
constitutes a MHW, and to that end Hobday et al. (2016) @Hobday2016 have
defined it as “a prolonged discrete anomalously warm water event that
can be described by its duration, intensity, rate of evolution, and
spatial extent”. By applying the MHW definition to the aforementioned
events, Hobday et al. (2016) @Hobday2016 were able to derive statistical
features of the MHWs, such as their frequency along a time series and
maximum and cumulative intensity. Whereas extreme hot events may be
demonstrably damaging to organisms and ecosystems, extreme cold events
also have the potential to negatively impact organisms and ecosystems.

MCSs are analogous to MHWs, but they are of opposite sign. MCSs are
projected to become less frequent under future climatic scenarios, but
there are also examples of them becoming more frequent in some
localities @Gershunov2008 [@Matthes2015]. They are frequently lethal
@Woodward1987 and are known to have caused mass fish @Gunter1941
[@Gunter1951; @Holt1983] and invertebrate @Gunter1951 [@Crisp1964]
kills, the death of juvenile and sub-adult manatees @OShea1985
[@Marsh1986] as well as affecting organismal physiological tolerances,
life history strategies, and habitat requirements @Ellis2015. Cold
temperatures are therefore very important in setting species
distribution limits, particularly limiting their range north- or
southwards towards high latitudes @Firth2011, and the timing of the
onset of the growing season @Jentsch2007. At an ecosystem level there is
still a paucity of information on effects of MCSs, but it is easy to
postulate how population-level consequences might aggregate to drive
whole ecosystem responses (e.g. @Kreyling2008 [@Rehage2016]). Indeed,
the range contractions of ecosystem engineer species such as mussels
have been shown to relate to MCSs (e.g. @Firth2011 [@Firth2015]).

Some of the MCSs known to have had impacts on populations and ecosystems
were caused by atmospheric cold spells that affect the intertidal biota
(e.g. @Gunter1941 [@Firth2011]) and not by seawater. Here we focus on
MCSs measured in seawater. This may imply local events (i.e. extreme
atmospheric cold spells that perturb the seawater locally) or
broad-scale drivers. The driver of the MCSs localised to the coast, as
we have already suggested, is hypothesised to be coastal weather
phenomena. But what mechanism might explain coastal MCSs originating
from offshore or by oceanic processes? Large-scale
atmospheric-oceanographic coupling is very likely being affected by
global warming, which is projected to cause the intensification of
upwelling favourable winds and consequently the intensification and
increasing frequency of upwelling (see Garciá-Reyes et al. 2015 for a
review of this and alternative hypotheses). The question then is, could
an intensification of upwelling be attributed to coastal MCSs, or are
they linked to local coastal atmospheric forcing? Little research yet
exists that investigates this question other than to link anoxia and
other negative factors from problematic phytoplankton blooms caused by
extreme upwelling events to create lethal conditions for species living
within upwelling regions (e.g. @Laboy-nieves2001). Whereas anoxia is a
problem attributable to phytoplankton blooms themselves @Diaz2008 and
not the extreme cold temperatures *per se*, if a relationship can be
shown between MCSs and anoxia resulting from algal blooms it would
provide extremely valuable insight into how coastal ecosystems respond
to climatic change. Furthermore, since mass mortalities and ecosystem
change may result directly from MCSs, a mechanistic understanding of
their drivers will be invaluable. To this end it serves as a
constructive first step to study the prevalence of MCSs with respect to
different kinds of oceanic forcing mechanisms.

Hobday et al. (2016) @Hobday2016 applied their MHW framework to  NOAA
optimally interpolated sea surface temperature (hereafter referred to as
OISST; @Reynolds2007) data, but warned users to be cognisant that
different data sets would provide different kinds of information
pertaining to the heat waves. Our aims here are two-fold. Firstly, we
apply the MHW (MCS) definition to datasets of *in situ* and gridded SST
temperature time series collected at different scales along the South
African coast for three different coastal sections, each variously
forced by the Agulhas and Benguela Currents and regional aspects of the
coastal bathymetry and geomorphology. These regional drivers of the
thermal regime (east, south and west coast) coupled with local
modifications (coastal vs. offshore) can be expected to impart different
thermal signatures on the temperature data sets and manifest in
differences in the metrics of MHWs (MCSs). Secondly, we aim to discuss
the significance of MHWs (MCSs) within the context of the data sets’
inherent differences and the various dynamical properties that then
emerge because of the regional oceanographic context, so as to provide a
mechanistic understanding of the nature and origin of MHWs (MCSs) in
three oceanographically distinct ocean/coastal regions.

To add a mechanistic understanding of the drivers of MHWs (MCSs)
manifesting in the coastal environment, we hypothesised that coastal MHW
(MCS) events could either be coupled with synoptic scale processes
perturbing the offshore region at scales of 100s of kms, or originate
solely at a local scale as isolated incidents. Investigating the former
possibility required the assessment of concurrent gridded SSTs derived
from daily OISST data product, extracted for the bounding boxes in ,
averaged spatially, and lagged or led by a number of days relative to
the onset of the events at the coast. This analysis centres around the
top three MHWs (MCSs) ranked with respect to cumulative intensity for
each of 21 coastal sites. The rates of co-occurrence of coastal with
mesoscale MHWs (MCSs) are used in part to understand how many of the
extreme events detected in all three coastal sections originate at the
coast or are artefacts of warming (cooling) in the respective currents.
We think that this approach will yield considerable insight into the
nature and variability of the thermal regime of nearshore seawater.

![Map of South Africa showing the bathymetry (only the 250m isobath is
indicated), the location of the *in situ* thermal time series shown with
circles and approximations of the pixels used along the shore-normal
transects from the daily  NOAA OISST @Reynolds2007 shown with black
boxes. The SST field was derived from the JPL G1SST 1 km blended SST
product and shows the state of the ocean on 2016-02-14. Sites 5, 6 and 7
are to the east of the Cape Peninsula and are situated along the shores
of False Bay. The Agulhas Current along the east coast of the country is
visualized here in a yellowish colour as a jet of relatively warmer
water projecting in a south-westerly direction, and hugging the
continental shelf. The blueish patches north of the Cape Peninsula
represent upwelled water. Some upwelled water may also be present around
Sites 14 (Tsitsikamma) and 15–16 (Port Elizabeth).<span
data-label="fig:Figure1"></span>](figure1_1km_labeled.pdf){width="100.00000%"}

Methods
=======

Study region
------------

The variety of oceanographic features around the *ca*. 2,700 km long
South African coastline provides a natural testing bed for the potential
effects of different forcing mechanisms on the occurrence of MHWs and
MCSs. Annual mean (SD) coastal seawater temperatures range from 12.3
(1.2)C at the western limit near the Namibian border (Site 1) to 24.4
(2.0)C in the east near the Mozambican border (Site 21), and our study
sites were selected to cover this full range (). We classify the
coastline into three regions based on their major oceanographic
features, their temperature characteristics, and aspects of the
underlying continental shelf. The first is the west coast region
dominated by the Benguela Current, which forms an Eastern Boundary
Upwelling System (EBUS) @Hutchings2009. Seasonal upwelling is maintained
by prevailing south-easterly trade winds. Evenly low temperatures are
especially noticeable at upwelling cells over a relatively narrow
continental shelf in the region northwards of the Cape Peninsula to Cape
Columbine. The west coast defines a cool temperate regime, with the
range of monthly mean temperatures at most sections intermediate between
cold temperate and warm temperate @Luning1990. The second region is the
warm temperate (*sensu* @Luning1990) east coast where the influence of
the south-westerly flowing warm Agulhas Current flowing tightly along
the narrow continental shelf (except for the Natal Bight) is strongly
felt. This stretch of coastline is spatially homogeneous with respect to
temperature and characterised by a moderate amount of seasonal
variation. Although the Agulhas Current retroflects back into the
southern Indian Ocean @Hutchings2009 just south of the much wider and
cooler Agulhas Bank @Roberts2005, its influence extends as far west as
False Bay (Sites 5–21; ). The third coastal region is that overlying the
Agulhas Bank. Although also warm temperate, it experiences a much larger
range in annual temperature and variability compared the west and east
coast regions, which is in part influenced by the retention and cooling
of Agulhas Current water on the bank, the presence of some
current-driven upwelling cells along this coastline (Sites 15–17)
@Roberts2005, and because of the effects of embayments and capes
throughout the region.

Temperature data
----------------

We use two sources of seawater temperature data. The first dataset is
comprised of 127 records of *in situ* temperature records of daily
measurements for up to 40 years in duration with a mean duration of
*ca*. 19 years. Whereas these *in situ* time series are generally
shorter than the recommended 30 year minimum @Hobday2016 and have some
small amounts of missing data, it is our opinion that the benefit of
using *in situ* data over satellite data is that they give a better
representation of the thermal characteristics near the coastline, a
region where satellite SST measurements have been shown to perform
poorly (e.g. @Smale2009 [@Castillo2010]). In a South African context,
Smit et al. (2013) @Smit2013 have shown that satellite SST data display
a warm bias as large as 6C over *in situ* temperatures in the nearshore
environment. In an attempt to compromise between the proscribed
requirements in Hobday et al. (2016) @Hobday2016 of a 30 year minimum
and no missing data, all time series under 10 years in length were
eliminated. Next, our 127 time series were screened and those missing
more than 10% of their daily values were removed, leaving a total of 21
time series. Care was taken to select continuous series with as few as
possible consecutive missing values, since having regions in the data
with more than two consecutive missing data points interferes with the
identification of the anomalous events (see below). These stations were
classified into three coastal sections defined by properties of their
oceanography and biogeography @Smit2013. The meta data for these time
series and the coastal sections they were aggregated into may be found
in and the site localities are displayed spatially in .

The second set of temperature data used in this study are the daily
 NOAA optimally interpolated sea surface temperature (OISST;
@Reynolds2007) derived from the Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer
(AVHRR). To compare the OISST and *in situ* time series, shore-normal
transects were drawn from each of the 21 sites extending to the 200m
isobath. The OISST data were then extracted at each of the roughly
25  25 km pixels along these transects, shown as black boxes in . Where
the shelf was less than 25 km wide (Sites 17–21) the nearest ‘ocean
pixel’ to the *in situ* time series coordinate was used. The individual
time series within each pixel were then averaged along each transect
corresponding to the 21 *in situ* sites. This produced 21 OISST time
series that could then be analysed for MHWs (MCSs) in the same way as
the *in situ* data. Note that the OISST time series had valid data
covering 1982–2014 which did not match exactly the coverage by
individual *in situ* sites.

Defining and calculating MHWs and MCSs
--------------------------------------

MHWs are “discrete prolonged anomalously warm water events in a
particular location.” Here we introduce the opposite but analogous
concept of a Marine Cold Spell (MCS), which is calculated in the same
manner as a MHW, except that events are detected as deviations below a
seasonally varying anomalously low threshold relative to the site’s
climatology. Although MCS intensities are calculated as negative values
(i.e. anomalies) they are reported here as absolute values.

A Python script (https://github.com/ecjoliver/marineHeatWaves; see
Hobday et al. (2016) @Hobday2016) was used to calculate the MHWs and
MCSs for both the *in situ* and OISST time series, producing the metrics
in . The individual events detected and their attendant statistics were
meaned into a series of annual values. These annual values were then
meaned for each coastal section for later comparison.

  Name \[unit\]                       Definition
  ----------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Count \[no. events per year\]       *n*: number of MHWs per year
  Duration \[days\]                   *D*: Consecutive period of time that temperature exceeds the threshold
  Maximum intensity \[C\]             *i~max~*: highest temperature anomaly value during the MHW
  Mean intensity \[C\]                *i~mean~*: mean temperature anomaly during the MHW
  Cumulative intensity \[C x days\]   *i~cum~*: sum of daily intensity anomalies

  : Metrics of MHWs and their descriptions as used by Hobday et al.
  (2016) @Hobday2016. In the case of MCSs, values are calculated with
  respect to the 10th percentile and absolute intensity values are
  reported.<span data-label="table1"></span>

To detect the individual events, a climatological mean and 90th and 10th
percentiles were calculated for each day of the year by pooling all data
within an 11-day window across all years. MHWs (MCSs) were detected as
periods of time when temperatures exceeded the 90th (10th) percentile
for at least five days. The implication is therefore that MHWs (MCSs)
could develop in winter (summer) months. Since our *in situ* time series
are of differing lengths we calculated the climatology over all
available years; in the case of the OISST data, climatologies were
calculated over a 30-year base period from 1982–2012. Furthermore, the
algorithm found discrete events with well-defined start and end dates,
but ‘breaks’ between events lasting $\leq$2 days followed by subsequent
$\geq$5 day events were considered as continuous events. Once events
were defined, a set of metrics were calculated including maximum and
mean intensity (measured as anomalies relative to the climatological
mean), duration (time between start and end dates), and cumulative
intensity (the integrated intensity over the duration of the event,
analogous to degree-heating-days).

Because MHWs (MCSs) are thus calculated by percentiles rather than
maximum values centred around a window of time with respect to the
Julian day, any time of year could be shown to be experiencing a MHW
(MCS). This is an important consideration as unusually warm waters
occurring during the winter months of a year, the time when many species
need cold water for effective spawning spore release, can have a
negative effect on the recruitment success of that population for the
year @Wernberg2011.

It is important to understand that MHWs can result from a combination of
atmospheric forcing and oceanic processes, but that the approach here
aims only to shed light on the oceanic drivers by virtue of the
inclusion of mesoscale OISST data linked with the coastal *in situ* data
sets.

In order to better understand the potential impact mesoscale phenomena
have on coastal events, the rates of co-occurrence between the MHWs
(MCSs) found within each time series between the two datasets were
compared. This was initially done by taking each event (warm and cold)
within an *in situ* time series and looking for an event occurring
within the OISST time series at the same site within a certain period of
time before the *in situ* date. These co-occurrence proportions were
then used to describe how often the mesoscale oceanography off the coast
pre-empted the extreme events occurring along the coastline. All events
occurring on dates outside of the dates occurring within the matching
time series were removed from this calculation. The sum of events found
to occur within the same time frame were then divided by the total
number of *in situ* events checked against the OISST data to produce a
co-occurrence proportion. The proportions of co-occurrence were then
recalculated controlling for the amount of lag used when comparing the
two different datasets for concurrent events, as well as the
directionality used for this comparison. In other words, a range of lag
from 2–14 was used for each site to see how far apart events generally
occurred and the lag period used was also applied only after the *in
situ* date, as well as both before and after the date, effectively
doubling the range of the lag. This allowed us to see how often the *in
situ* event pre-empted the mesoscale event as well as seeing broadly the
amounts of co-occurrence occurring between the two data sets.

Besides controlling for the length and direction of lag, the size of the
events themselves (ranked by cumulative intensity) were compared. This
was accomplished by controlling the pool of events with which to compare
the datasets per site in steps of 10th percentiles. This progressively
removed smaller events until only the larger events were being compared.
This allowed us to track the co-occurrence of only the largest events,
reducing the overall proportion of co-occurrence found within each site
as caused by the smaller events occurring at similar times as large
events.

The top three MHWs (MCSs) for each *in situ* and OISST time series as
defined by cumulative intensity were also noted in order to visually
compare the co-occurrence of events in detail, both within and between
the different datasets.

Given that the anthropogenic forcing of climate change is predicted to
increase the temperature of most of the ocean over time, it stands to
reason that, as a function of the 90th and 10th percentiles, one would
expect to see the larger MHWs near the end of the time series, and the
larger MCSs near the beginning. This can be tracked visually by looking
at the top three warm and cold events for each time series. Given that
the OISST time series are greater than 30 years in length it is possible
to discern the long term trends within the data apart from the noise of
any inter-decadal patterns (Schlegel and Smit, in review). Using a
simple linear model, the decadal trend in the annual occurrence of MHWs
and MCSs was calculated for all of the OISST data as well as the *in
situ* time series that were over 30 years long. The shorter time series
simply had the proportion of MHWs or MCSs in the first half of the time
series compared against those in the second half to show if there were
more or less.

Results
=======

Events
------

One can see in that the *in situ* time series showed that the typically
cooler west coast experienced the most MHWs per year, and that these
were longer and more intense on average than those along the other two
coastal sections. Whereas the east coast experienced slightly more MCSs
per year than the other two coastal sections, it is the volatile south
coast that experienced the longest and most intense MCSs. There was no
significant difference between the annual count of events for each
coastal section (F=0.727, df~1~=2, df~2~=926, *p*=0.48) or between the
count of MHWs and MCSs (F=0.732, df~1~=1, df~2~=926, *p*=0.39). There
was a significant difference between the coastal sections for the
duration of the events (F=8.907, df~1~=2, df~2~=594, *p*&lt;0.01) but no
significant difference between the event types (i.e. MHWs and MCSs)
themselves (F=0.722, df~1~=1, df~2~=594, *p*=0.39). The intensity of
events was significantly different between each coastal section
(F=57.55, df~1~=2, df~2~=594, *p*&lt;0.01) and the type of events
(F=5372, df~1~=1, df~2~=594, *p*&lt;0.01). Note that the degrees of
freedom in the results for the count of events and duration/ intensity
differ as there are many years from the data in which there were no
events. These were given as “0” values for the count results as this
value has meaning in this context however, any years in which no events
occurred had their duration and intensity results listed as “NA” rather
than “0” as this would be incorrect.

  coast    MHW \[count\]   duration \[days\]   intensity \[C\]   MCS \[count\]   duration \[days\]   intensity \[C\]
  ------- --------------- ------------------- ----------------- --------------- ------------------- -----------------
  all        1.6(1.8)          9.3(5.1)          2.65(0.79)        1.5(1.7)          9.0(5.1)          2.79(1.09)
  west       1.8(1.9)          9.1(3.9)          2.86(0.90)        1.5(1.9)          8.5(5.2)          2.32(0.58)
  south      1.5(1.8)          9.8(6.1)          2.50(0.65)        1.5(1.6)          9.7(5.5)          3.08(1.22)
  east       1.5(1.7)          7.7(2.2)          2.85(0.89)        1.6(1.6)          7.1(1.9)          2.37(0.67)

  : The mean(sd) annual values for event frequency, duration and
  intensity for MHWs and MCSs for each coastal section as calculated
  from the *in situ* time series. All individual events were first
  aggregated into annual means before being averaged into overall mean
  values for each coastal section.<span data-label="table2"></span>

Results from the analysis of the OISST data () show that there was a
significant difference from the *in situ* data for count (F=50.27,
df~1~=1, df~2~=2306, *p*&lt;0.01) and duration (F=17.57, df~1~=1,
df~2~=1612, *p*&lt;0.01) of events but not mean intensity (F=0.117,
df~1~=1, df~2~=1612, *p*=0.73). The mean annual count and duration of
MHWs and MCSs were greater than their *in situ* counterparts for all
coastal sections whereas the intensity of both event types on all
coastal sections were less than the results of the *in situ* data. With
this in mind we still see that the pattern of MHW and MCS event sizes
along the coastline differed from the *in situ* data, too. The largest
annual number of MHWs in the OISST data occurred on the warmer east
coast whereas the longest MHWs occurred on the volatile south coast with
the most intense events nearly split between the west and south coasts
respectively. The cooler west coast saw the most frequent occurrence of
MCSs with the OISST data. The longest MCSs occurred on the south coast,
same as the *in situ* data however, the most intense MCSs were seen off
the east coast. There was no significant difference between the annual
count of events per coast (F=0.542, df~1~=2, df~2~=1380, *p*=0.58) or
event type (F=0.155, df~1~=1, df~2~=1380, *p*=0.69). The duration of the
events in the different coastal sections differed significantly from one
another (F=9.534, df~1~=2, df~2~=1018, *p*&lt;0.01) whereas the duration
of the event types did not (F=0.055, df~1~=1, df~2~=1018, *p*=0.81).
Lastly, as with the *in situ* data, the intensity of the events from the
OISST dataset differed significantly between each coastal section
(F=16.17, df~1~=2, df~2~=1018, *p*&lt;0.01) and the type of event
(F=17645, df~1~=1, df~2~=1018, *p*&lt;0.01).

  coast    MHW \[count\]   duration \[days\]   intensity \[C\]   MCS \[count\]   duration \[days\]   intensity \[C\]
  ------- --------------- ------------------- ----------------- --------------- ------------------- -----------------
  all        2.2(2.1)          10.2(5.4)         1.72(0.33)        2.2(2.6)          10.2(5.1)         1.83(0.52)
  west       2.1(1.8)          10.9(6.7)         1.75(0.41)        2.3(2.7)          9.8(6.6)          1.87(0.61)
  south      2.2(2.1)          10.6(5.5)         1.74(0.29)        2.1(2.7)          10.7(5.0)         1.79(0.45)
  east       2.5(2.3)          8.3(2.4)          1.64(0.33)        2.2(2.2)          9.4(3.4)          1.93(0.61)

  : The mean(sd) annual values for event frequency, duration and
  intensity for MHWs and MCSs for each coastal section as calculated
  from the OISST time series. All individual events were first
  aggregated into annual means before being averaged into overall mean
  values for each coastal section.<span data-label="table3"></span>

Top three events
----------------

The mean annual statistics shown in and give a broad overview of the
events occurring along the coastline however, examining the largest MHWs
and MCSs better aids in our understanding of which coastal sections show
the most variability. The ranking of these events is based on the
cumulative intensity (C x days) statistic as explained in . The three
largest MHWs that occurred within the *in situ* dataset were all on the
south coast (). Two of these events occurred during 1999, making it a
particularly hot year. The size of the south coast events are larger
than those occurring along the west coast, with the largest three MHWs
on the east coast being much smaller than those occurring on the south
coast (). The cumulative intensity of the entire coastline and each
section individually may be calculated for both datasets from and by
multiplying the duration by the intensity. When calculating the mean
cumulative intensity of MHWs from the *in situ* data for the entire
coastline by the individual events and not the annual means we see that
mean(sd) is 26.11(24.37)(C x days).

  coast   site             start date   duration \[days\]   intMean \[C\]   intCum \[C x days\]
  ------- --------------- ------------ ------------------- --------------- ---------------------
  west    Sea Point        1996-01-04          40               3.08              123.20
  west    Sea Point        2005-05-21          39               2.56               99.66
  west    Sea Point        1975-12-30          38               2.62               99.41
  south   Muizenberg       1999-12-01          98               3.17              310.30
  south   Mossel Bay       1993-06-25          97               1.77              171.30
  south   Muizenberg       1999-10-20          35               4.47              156.40
  east    Nahoon Beach     1995-10-14          18               5.18               93.31
  east    Eastern Beach    1985-12-27          19               3.33               63.18
  east    Orient Beach     1990-06-25          12               3.80               45.59

  : The three largest MHWs per coast from the *in situ* data. The coast
  column shows in which coastal section the event occurred. The site
  column gives the name of the site, as seen in , which gives the index
  number necessary to find it’s location along the coastline in . The
  start date column gives the day on which the event began and the
  duration (days) column shows how many days the event lasted for. The
  intMean column shows the mean intensity of the event and the intCum
  column shows the cumulative intensity, as calculated in .<span
  data-label="table4"></span>

![The daily temperature values for each *in situ* time series (grey)
used in this study and the corresponding OISST time series (black)
extracted for comparison as seen in . The top three MHWs are indicated
by circles (with the rank inside) for each site as judged by greatest
cumulative intensity. The top three MCSs for each site are indicated by
squares (with the rank inside). Sites 1 – 4 represent the west coast,
sites 5 – 17 represent the south coast and sites 18 – 21 represent the
east coast.<span
data-label="fig:Figure2"></span>](figure2.pdf){width="60.00000%"}

As with the MHWs, the largest three MCSs from the *in situ* data were
also found on the south coast (). Maintaining the pattern seen with the
MHWs, the largest MCSs on the west coast were the next largest three
events for the entire coastline with the three largest MCSs from the
east coast being smaller than the other two coastal sections (). The
mean(sd) cumulative intensity (C x days) for MCSs over the entire
coastline was 26.45(24.25)(C x days). The cumulative intensity (C x
days) of events from each of the coastal sections in the *in situ* data
were found to be significantly different (F=7.377, df~1~=2, df~2~=1444,
*p*&lt;0.01) as well as the events themselves (F=1753, df~1~=1,
df~2~=1444, *p*&lt;0.01).

  coast   site             start date   duration \[days\]   intMean \[C\]   intCum \[C x days\]
  ------- --------------- ------------ ------------------- --------------- ---------------------
  west    Sea Point        1990-06-23          44               2.88              126.60
  west    Sea Point        1983-06-10          39               2.84              110.90
  west    Sea Point        2000-11-28          23               3.70               85.04
  south   Muizenberg       1984-07-14          63               2.92              183.70
  south   Muizenberg       1992-03-24          56               2.78              155.60
  south   Ystervarkpunt    2000-05-11          51               2.94              150.10
  east    Sodwana          2004-02-12          17               3.25               55.20
  east    Orient Beach     1984-03-31          13               3.73               48.44
  east    Orient Beach     1995-12-6           15               3.01               45.13

  : The three largest MCSs per coast from the *in situ* data. Column
  descriptions may be found in the caption for .<span
  data-label="table5"></span>

As can be seen in , the three largest events occurring for each time
series within the OISST dataset are largely different from the *in situ*
dataset and show a greater amount of co-occurrence for neighbouring
coastal stations than the corresponding *in situ* time series. This
apparent difference in the cumulative intensity (C x days) of events
between the two datasets is significant (F=8.857, df~1~=1, df~2~=4493,
*p*&lt;0.01). The pattern seen in the *in situ* data of the largest MHWs
and MCSs occurring on the south, west and east coasts respectively is
not repeated with the OISST dataset. Whereas the largest MHW occurred on
the south coast in the OISST data, the three largest MHWs from the west
coast were larger than the second and third largest events from the
south coast (). The three largest MHWs from the east coast again came in
below the other coasts(). The mean(sd) cumulative intensity (C x days)
over the entire coastline for the MHWs from the OISST dataset was
markedly lower than its *in situ* counterpart at 18.65(15.10)(C x days).

  coast   site             start date   duration \[days\]   intMean \[C\]   intCum \[C x days\]
  ------- --------------- ------------ ------------------- --------------- ---------------------
  west    Sea Point        1992-01-21          39               2.96              115.60
  west    Hout Bay         1992-01-20          36               3.15              113.50
  west    Kommetjie        2004-10-29          53               2.03              107.40
  south   Knysna           1992-05-3           50               2.41              120.40
  south   Fish Hoek        2004-10-30          53               1.92              101.60
  south   Pollock Beach    1994-03-27          31               3.19               99.05
  east    Nahoon Beach     2006-10-21          25               1.81               45.34
  east    Eastern Beach    2000-06-24          26               1.58               41.12
  east    Orient Beach     2000-06-24          26               1.58               41.12

  : The three largest MHWs per coast from the OISST data. Column
  descriptions may be found in the caption for .<span
  data-label="table6"></span>

The largest MCSs from the OISST data () are much less clearly ranked
than their *in situ* counterparts (). The three largest MCSs on the east
coast, like with both datasets and both types of events, were smaller
than the other two coasts (). All of the coastal sections show that at
least two of their largest MCSs occurred at the same time at different
sites. The coastal mean(sd) cumulative intensity (C x days) of the MCSs
from the OISST data were much closer to their *in situ* counterparts at
23.17(23.49)(C x days). The difference in the cumulative intensity (C x
days) of events between the coastal sections in the OISST dataset were
not found to be significant (F=0.503, df~1~=2, df~2~=3049, *p*=0.60)
however, the difference between the MHWs and MCSs was (F=3472, df~1~=1,
df~2~=3049, *p*&lt;0.01).

  coast   site                  start date   duration \[days\]   intMean \[C\]   intCum \[C x days\]
  ------- -------------------- ------------ ------------------- --------------- ---------------------
  west    Kommetjie             2010-12-13          54               3.92              211.90
  west    Hout Bay              2010-12-25          41               4.06              166.30
  west    Sea Point             2010-12-25          41               3.78              154.90
  south   Hamburg               1984-02-5           65               3.91              254.20
  south   Storms River Mouth    1982-03-13          60               2.79              167.30
  south   Tsitsikamma East      1982-03-13          60               2.79              167.30
  east    Eastern Beach         2010-12-26          32               2.90               92.85
  east    Orient Beach          2010-12-26          32               2.90               92.85
  east    Eastern Beach         1984-02-24          22               3.97               87.26

  : The three largest MCSs per coast from the OISST data. Column
  descriptions may be found in the caption for .<span
  data-label="table7"></span>

The temperature values from the dates of the largest MHW and MCS for the
west and south coasts from the *in situ* data may be seen concurrently
with the temperature values from the matching OISST time series in . One
may see that when the largest events were occurring in the *in situ*
data, nothing of note was occurring within the OISST data.

![The temperature profiles of the largest MHW and MCS from the south and
west coasts respectively. The left column shows the *in situ* event
while the right column shows the OISST temperature values occurring on
the same dates. The top row shows the largest MHW that occurred on the
south coast while the second row shows the largest MHW that occurred on
the west coast. The bottom two rows show the largest MCS from the *in
situ* that occurred on the south and west coasts respectively.<span
data-label="fig:Figure3"></span>](figure3.png){width="100.00000%"}

Co-occurrence rates
-------------------

The proportion of co-occurrence found for MHWs and MCSs between the
datasets for each site may be seen in and respectively. When using the
lag windows before and after the *in situ* event and comparing all
events (0^th^ percentile) we see that as the width of lag increased from
2 to 14 days the mean(sd) proportion of co-occurrence for all sites
increased linearly for MHWs (0.09(0.07) to 0.38(0.20)) and MCSs
(0.10(0.05) to 0.30(0.13)). Using these same constraints we see that
south coast sites had the largest mean(sd) increase in co-occurrence for
MHWs (0.10(0.07) to 0.45(0.18)) and MCSs (0.11(0.06) to 0.34(0.14))
whereas the west coast sites showed the smallest increase for MHWs
(0.07(0.03) to 0.28(0.06)) and MCSs (0.08(0.04) to 0.19(0.02)). With all
variables controlled for in the same manner, the co-occurrence rates
between the different coastal sections were not significantly different
for MHWs at a 2 day lag (F=0.799, df~1~=2, df~2~=18, *p*=0.46) or a 14
day lag (F=2.374, df~1~=2, df~2~=18, *p*=0.12). There were no
significant differences between the coastal sections for MCSs at a 2 day
lag (F=0.671, df~1~=2, df~2~=18, *p*=0.52) or 14 day lag (F=2.357,
df~1~=2, df~2~=18, *p*=0.12).

The directionality of the lag also affected the co-occurrence of events.
Comparing all events (0^th^ percentile) within a 14 day lag window
before the *in situ* event gave higher mean(sd) rates of co-occurrence
for MHWs (0.22(0.13)) than for the same lag window after the *in situ*
event for MHWs (0.18(0.10). This same comparison for MCSs showed that
the lag window before the *in situ* event (0.16(0.09)) had slightly
lower rates of co-occurrence than the lag window after the *in situ*
event (0.17(0.08). When the smaller events were screened from comparison
and only the largest half of the events were used (50^th^ percentile),
the difference in mean(sd) co-occurrence proportions for MHWs event
lessened at 0.16(011) before the *in situ* event and 0.15(0.12) after.
The mean(sd) co-occurrence proportion of MCSs at this level was less
when using a lag window before the *in situ* event at 0.05(0.08) than
for a lag window after at 0.08(0.08).

There was no co-occurrence for the largest MCSs between the datasets,
whereas several of the time series on the south coast showed
co-occurrence for their most extreme MHWs. Interestingly, the rates of
co-occurrence for these largest MHWs was greater when the *in situ*
event preceded the OISST event.

![Proportion of MHW co-occurrence between *in situ* and OISST datasets
for each site where sites 1 – 4 represent the west coast, sites 5 – 17
the south coast and 18 – 21 the east coast. The left column denotes the
proportion of co-occurrence when events in the OISST data occurring on
or before the dates of the *in situ* events were used. The left column
shows the proportion of co-occurrence when OISST events that occurred
after the *in situ* event dates were compared. The central column shows
the overall proportion of co-occurrence. The $x$-axis indicates the size
of the events, based on percentiles, used for calculating the
co-occurrence proportions. The days of lag used, from 2 – 14, are shown
here in diminishing shades of red.<span
data-label="fig:Figure4"></span>](figure4.pdf){width="50.00000%"}

![Proportion of MCS co-occurrence between *in situ* and OISST datasets
for each site as seen for MHWs in . The days of lag are shown here in
diminishing shades of blue.<span
data-label="fig:Figure5"></span>](figure5.pdf){width="60.00000%"}

Decadal trends in MHWs and MCSs
-------------------------------

It was found that the mean(sd) decadal trend in occurrence of MHWs in
the OISST dataset is 0.5(0.3) dec$^{-1}$ across all sites and
-0.7(0.6) dec$^{-1}$ for MCSs. The decadal trends in MHW occurrence
increase as one moves from the west to east coasts with the mean(sd)
decadal MHW trend on the west coast being 0.3(0.3) dec$^{-1}$, the south
coast being 0.5(0.3) dec$^{-1}$ and the east coast coming in at
0.6(0.2) dec$^{-1}$. Just as MHWs are occurring more frequently per
decade on the east coast than the west, MCSs are decreasing more
frequently on the east coast than the west. The decadal trend in MCSs on
the west coast is -0.1(0.6) dec$^{-1}$, -0.8(0.5) dec$^{-1}$ on the
south coast and -0.9(0.2) dec$^{-1}$ on the east coast.

Of the 21 *in situ* time series, only 4 of them were long enough to
calculate decadal trends. Of these four time series the mean(sd) decadal
trend for MHWs was found to be 0.3(0.5) dec$^{-1}$ and
-0.1(0.5) dec$^{-1}$ for MCSs. There were two sites from the west coast
and two from the south, excluding the east coast from a possible
calculation of decadal change in MHWs and MCSs. The mean(sd) decadal
trend for MHWs (MCSs) on the west coast was 0.1(0.5) dec$^{-1}$
(-0.2(0.7) dec$^{-1}$) and 0.5(0.5) dec$^{-1}$ (0.1(0.4) dec$^{-1}$) on
the south.

The other 17 *in situ* time series had the sum of the annual count of
events in the first half of each time series compared against the sum of
the annual count of events in the second half. This produced a
proportion value that could be used as an indicator as to how many more
MHWs or MCSs were occurring in the second half of the time series. The
mean(sd) proportion of MHWs occurring in the second half of the shorter
time series was 1.7(1.3) whereas the proportion of MCSs was 0.8(0.6).
The general pattern seen in the longer time series of increasing MHW
occurrence and decreasing MCS occurrence was not seen in these shorter
data. The mean(sd) proportion of MHWs (MCSs) in the second half of the
time series on the west coast was 1.5(0.6) (1.8(0.6)), 2.1(1.4)
(0.5(0.3)) on the south coast and 0.7(0.4) (1.0(0.8)) on the east coast.

Discussion
==========

Events
------

Having never been calculated before, it was not yet known that every
time series from each coastal section of South Africa experiences on
average more than one MHW and one MCS per year. It was surprising to
find that the mean intensity of MCSs on the south coast was
significantly larger (*p*&lt;0.01) than the west coast, which is in an
EBUS. From these results we may now hypothesise that there is an
additional driver on the south coast affecting the extreme events there
that is not present on the other two coastal sections. It was assumed
that the east coast would experience the fewest and least intense
events. Whereas the duration (days) of its events were significantly
shorter than the south coast (*p*&lt;0.01), the frequency and mean
intensity of its MHWs and MCSs were not the smallest found. This means
that every portion of the coastline has the potential to experience an
event strong enough to affect its species assemblage and/or local
ecology.

The difference between the *in situ* and OISST datasets was also
striking. One may see in and that the patterns presented by the data are
intrinsically different, it is not simply a matter of the statistical
significance between the values. The OISST data showed many weak events
occurring often whereas the *in situ* dataset showed fewer, stronger
events. This implies that the events that occurred in the different
datasets were unrelated, and any co-occurrence was largely due to
chance. Besides this difference, both datasets tended to show that the
south coast had longer and more intense results than the other two
coastal sections, but this too is not a consistent result. Before
calculating the proportions of co-occurrence, it was already clear from
these results that the events that occurred within the OISST data would
differ from the *in situ* data.

Another important difference found between the datasets was that MHWs
were shown to be longer and more intense in the *in situ* dataset,
whereas the OISST dataset shows MCSs being longer and more intense. This
also supports the argument that the events detected by these two
datasets were not the same, even when they were found to occur within
similar time frames. It is also counter-intuitive to what we expected to
find. One would assume that as the *in situ* data are measured at *ca*.
5m deep on average, which is below the bulk surface layer (*ca*. 0.5m)
that the OISST data measure @Reynolds2002, they would be predisposed to
picking up cold upwelling events and less exposed to thermal heating,
which would appear as larger MCSs and smaller MHWs compared to the OISST
data. The cause of this discrepancy warrants further research.

This apparent discrepancy also places doubt on the use of MCSs as a
proxy for upwelling. If the *in situ* data had recorded longer and/or
more intense MCSs than the OISST data it would have shown that the MCS
algorithm was detecting more extreme cold events near the coastline,
where upwelling is known to occur @Hutchings2009 [@Lutjeharms2000].
Instead the results show that offshore MCS are, on average, longer and
more intense. It is the suggestion of the authors that using the MCS
algorithm to detect upwelling be done with extreme caution. The MCS
algorithm detects cold events based on their intensity outside of a
locally produced climatology, and because most upwelling occurs at
seasonally predictable times, the cold events detected here are likely
due to other factors.

Top three events
----------------

It was hypothesised that the south coast would experience the most
extreme events as measured by cumulative intensity, but it was
unanticipated that these events would be so much larger than the other
two coastal sections. Conversely, it was hypothesised that the east
coast would experience the least extreme events however and this proved
to be correct.

The disagreement between the *in situ* and OISST datasets continued into
the detection of the top three events along the coastline. The pattern
of event sizes within the *in situ* data are very clear in that the
south coast is much more volatile than the west and east coasts in that
order. The OISST data are less conclusive on whether the south or west
coast experiences the most extreme events, but it is apparent from all
of the analyses from both datasets that the east coast experiences very
few extreme MHWs or MCSs. Indeed, these findings support the hypothesis
that the east coast is the most stable of the three coasts as both
datasets show the most extreme events occurring here to only be a factor
of two greater than the coastal mean for cumulative intensity.

The sites along the south coast could be further divided into those
within False Bay (Sites 5–7) and those on the Agulhas Bank (Sites 8–17).
False Bay, which is  50 km across, is situated within the transition
zone between the Benguela and Agulhas Currents @Smit2013. Many satellite
temperatures products therefore inadequately resolve the SST within this
body of water (cite.). This is problematic as it is important to
precisely monitor the large ranges in temperature this area experiences
(cite.) as it is important both ecologically (cite.) and to the many
stakeholders that use this embayment. Two of the three largest MHWs and
MCSs from the *in situ* dataset were recorded within False Bay, whereas
only one large MHW and no MCSs were detected with the OISST dataset.
This illustrates the problem of using satellite temperature data for
coastal ecology.

The example of the discrepancies for the size of the events recorded in
False Bay also serves to illustrate the usefulness of satellite SST data
to detect events near the coastline. For example, Roberts (2004)
@Roberts2005 argues for a wind forced coastal upwelling cell near
Tsitsikamma (Sites 12–14). That these three sites show greater
cumulative intensities for MCSs than all but one time series for the
OISST dataset supports the hypothesis of such a coastal upwelling cell.
This is an intriguing use of the MCS algorithm to validate multiple
competing hypotheses that as of yet may not have been able to be tested
in any other way.

Another imporant consideration was the co-occurrence of the most extreme
events between and within time series. As one may see in and , none of
the top three MHWs or MCSs for any of the coastal sections from the *in
situ* dataset were the same. They were all inidvidually different events
occurring at different times. The OISST dataset tells an entirely
different story in that all but one of the coastal sections for both
MHWs and MCSs, had at least two of the three top events occurring at the
same time. This means that the largest events detected in the OISST data
were occurring over a broad area at the same time whereas the *in situ*
events were isolated not only in time, but in the location in which they
were occurring. This further reinfocres our conclusion that the events
detected by the different datasets are intinsically different from one
another.

Co-occurrence rates
-------------------

As one may see in , when looking at the the lag window before the *in
situ* events occurred, the rates of co-occurrence for MCSs are much
lower than for the MHWs. This shows that if these events are indeed
related, more MHWs are being caused by meso-scale activity than MCSs, as
was expected. This finding is supported further by comparing the rates
of co-occurrence for MCS lagged before and after the *in situ* event
occurred. More MCS from the OISST data are shown to occur after the *in
situ* events for all coastal sections. The co-occurrence rates of MHWs
before and after the *in situ* events are similar.

One may also infer from the results that the proportions of
co-occurrence for time series on the south coast being much larger than
the other two coasts is caused by the much higher level of influence
from meso-scale phenomena occurring on the Agulhas Bank. We also see
that there is a higher proportion of co-occurrence for the larger MHWs
and MCSs on the south coast when a lag window after the *in situ* event
is used (). This supports the argument that events originating in the
nearshore are then propagating out onto the Agulhas Bank and affecting
the oceanography there more often than meso-scale events originating on
the Agulhas Bank are affecting the nearshore environment. The overall
low rates of co-occurrence for all three coastal sections reinforces the
argument that it is not the meso-scale phenomena of the open ocean
around the coastline that is causing extreme events in the nearshore.

The very low proportion of co-occurrence between the datasets, and the
decline in the proportion as the smaller events are screened out is
strong evidence against the hypothesis that meso-scale activity, both
warm and cold, is causing nearshore extreme thermal events. The small
increases in co-occurrence for some sites as only larger events were
compared does imply that there is some relationship between the inshore
and offshore, but that some other variable(s) is having a greater effect
on the inshore. This is likely atmospheric forcing (cite.).

Climate change
--------------

As MHWs and MCSs are temperature related phenomena we would be remiss
not to discuss the potential of our findings in relation to climate
change. The count of the MHWs and MCSs that occurred along the coastline
is less telling in this regard than the trend in these events
themselves. Although all but 4 of the *in situ* time series used in this
investigation are too short to draw adequate conclusions on the decadal
trends seen in MHWs and MCSs, the OISST data are not. And as
hypothesised these data showed positive decadal trends for MHWs and
negative trends for MCSs. Meaning that over the past 33 years of
satellite observation, MHWs have been increasing every decade for each
coastal section while MCSs have been decreasing. Similar though less
conslcuisve patterns were found in the shorter *in situ* time series as
well. As the algorithm used to calculate these events is based on
percentiles, it stands to reason that as the mean temperature of South
Africa’s coastal waters increases by 0.1C per decade on average
(Schlegel and Smit, in review), there will be an increase in MHWs and a
decrease in MCSs. The gradual mean increase in temperature will cause
the algorithm used here to be biased in its detection of MHWs as time
progresses simply because temperatures are generally warmer in the later
half of the time series therefore, the chances of the algorithm
detecting a MHW increases because the base temperature from which the
MHW will be fluctuating from will be greater than the beginning of the
time series. Ultimately, for the species and ecosystems experiencing
this increase in duress, the semantic argument of the viability of
percentiles provides little solace.

Conclusion
==========

Given that the MHW algorithm is based on the percentiles found within
each time series and not on arbitrarily decided minimum or maximum
thresholds, one will always find a certain number of MHWs and MCSs in
any time series. This is evident in the results of our analysis ( and )
in that every time series used from both datasets experiences on average
at least one MHW and MCS per year. Within each dataset, but not between,
the count of events are similar throughout the coastline, regardless of
the local oceanographic and geographic properties. It is the cumulative
intensity of the events occurring on the different coastal sections that
most clearly defines them. We expected to see the most intense MCSs on
the west coast as this is part of an EBUS however, the south coast, a
region dominated by the warmer Agulhas Current, but with some influence
from the colder Benguela, had both the most intense and longest MHWs and
MCS in the *in situ* data. Even though it had been hypothesized that the
south coast would have intense events, the magnitude of intensity of the
events that occurred here over the other coastlines was surprising.

We have also shown that MCSs are not a good indicator for upwelling. As
upwelling tends to occur at seasonally predictable times, the MCS
algorithm does not consider these events as anomalous. Therefore the
MCSs measured here are indicators of non-seasonal or atypical forcing.

As the rates of co-occurrence between *in situ* and OISST data are
generally low, and the magnitude and co-occurrence of events within the
different datasets differ from one another, we infer that some other
force outside of meso-scale phenomena is contributing to extreme inshore
events. This is likely due to atmospheric forcing and warrants further
research to better understand what is driving the occurrence and
intensity of these events.

Acknowledgments {#acknowledgments .unnumbered}
===============

The authors would like to thank DAFF, DEA, EKZNW, KZNSB, SAWS and SAEON
for contributing all of the raw data used in this study. Without it,
this article and the SACTN would not be possible. This research was
supported by NRF Grant (CPRR14072378735). The authors report no
financial conflicts of interests. The data and analyses used in this
paper may be found at https://github.com/schrob040/MHW.

Supplementary {#supplementary .unnumbered}
=============

Meta-data {#meta-data .unnumbered}
---------

Further meta-data for each time series and source listed in geographic
order along the South African coast from the border of Namibia to the
border of Mozambique may be found in .

             ID site                 coast       lon      lat type       start.date   end.date     length   temp.days    NA.    mean     sd     min     max
  ----- ------- -------------------- ------- ------- -------- -------- ------------ ---------- ---------- ----------- ------ ------- ------ ------- -------
      2    1.00 Port Nolloth         west      16.87   -29.25 thermo        1298.00   15217.00   13920.00    12969.00   6.80   12.30   1.40    9.20   21.00
     14    2.00 Sea Point            west      18.38   -33.92 thermo        1460.00   15196.00   13737.00    12873.00   6.30   13.10   1.60    8.70   23.00
     16    3.00 Hout Bay             west      18.35   -34.05 UTR           7753.00   13990.00    6238.00     5933.00   4.90   11.20   1.80    7.50   16.70
     18    4.00 Kommetjie            west      18.33   -34.14 thermo        8094.00   15203.00    7110.00     6586.00   7.40   13.30   1.60    9.00   20.40
     21    5.00 Fish Hoek            south     18.44   -34.14 thermo        8094.00   15203.00    7110.00     6693.00   5.90   15.40   2.30   10.00   22.50
     23    6.00 Muizenberg           south     18.48   -34.10 thermo        1219.00   15210.00   13992.00    13443.00   3.90   15.90   3.00    9.00   25.00
     24    7.00 Gordons Bay          south     18.86   -34.16 thermo         985.00   15210.00   14226.00    13657.00   4.00   16.50   2.40   10.00   25.50
     26    8.00 Hermanus             south     19.25   -34.41 thermo        7273.00   15112.00    7840.00     7517.00   4.10   15.60   1.60    9.00   23.50
     32    9.00 Ystervarkpunt        south     21.74   -34.40 UTR           9426.00   13683.00    4258.00     4257.00   0.00   17.60   2.60   10.10   23.60
     33   10.00 Mossel Bay           south     22.16   -34.18 UTR           7846.00   13683.00    5838.00     5345.00   8.40   18.00   2.70   10.10   24.60
     36   11.00 Knysna               south     23.07   -34.08 UTR           9210.00   14552.00    5343.00     5006.00   6.30   17.30   2.60   10.70   24.20
     39   12.00 Tsitsikamma West     south     23.65   -33.98 thermo        7485.00   13558.00    6074.00     5607.00   7.70   17.20   2.60    9.50   29.30
     40   13.00 Storms River Mouth   south     23.90   -34.02 thermo        8490.00   14243.00    5754.00     5521.00   4.00   16.80   2.50    9.40   24.40
     41   14.00 Tsitsikamma East     south     23.91   -34.03 UTR           7849.00   14556.00    6708.00     6437.00   4.00   16.80   2.50    8.80   23.40
     52   15.00 Pollock Beach        south     25.68   -33.99 thermo       10723.00   15161.00    4439.00     4308.00   3.00   18.10   2.10   10.80   26.50
     53   16.00 Humewood             south     25.65   -33.97 thermo        1331.00   10955.00    9625.00     9324.00   3.10   18.00   2.30   11.00   25.00
     60   17.00 Hamburg              south     27.49   -33.29 UTR           9433.00   14665.00    5233.00     4898.00   6.40   17.50   1.80   12.10   24.10
     61   18.00 Eastern Beach        east      27.92   -33.02 thermo        5112.00   10437.00    5326.00     4802.00   9.80   17.90   1.80   12.50   25.00
     62   19.00 Orient Beach         east      27.92   -33.02 thermo        5112.00   15161.00   10050.00     9657.00   3.90   18.00   1.60   12.00   26.00
     63   20.00 Nahoon Beach         east      27.95   -32.99 thermo        5112.00   10437.00    5326.00     4954.00   7.00   18.10   1.70   10.00   25.00
    126   21.00 Sodwana              east      32.73   -27.42 UTR           8835.00   14634.00    5800.00     5392.00   7.00   24.40   2.00   18.60   29.10
     22   22.00 west coast           west      17.98   -32.84               1298.00   15217.00   10251.00     9590.00   6.30   12.50   1.60    8.60   20.30
    231   23.00 south coast          south     22.48   -34.06                985.00   15210.00    7418.00     7078.00   4.70   17.00   2.40   10.00   24.70
    241   24.00 east coast           east      29.13   -31.61               5112.00   15161.00    6626.00     6201.00   6.90   19.60   1.80   13.30   26.30

  : The metadata for all *in situ* time series used in this study.<span
  data-label="tableS1"></span>

References {#references .unnumbered}
==========

<span>50</span> natexlab\#1<span>\#1</span>url
\#1<span>`#1`</span>urlprefix

Alexander, L. V., Zhang, X., Peterson, T. C., Caesar, J., Gleason, B.,
<span>Klein Tank</span>, A. M. G., Haylock, M., Collins, D., Trewin, B.,
Rahimzadeh, F., Tagipour, A., <span>Rupa Kumar</span>, K., Revadekar,
J., Griffiths, G., Vincent, L., Stephenson, D. B., Burn, J., Aguilar,
E., Brunet, M., Taylor, M., New, M., Zhai, P., Rusticucci, M.,
Vazquez-Aguirre, J. L., 2006. <span>Global observed changes in daily
climate extremes of temperature and precipitation</span>. Journal of
Geophysical Research Atmospheres 111 (5).

, 2011. <span>American Meteorological Society Glossary of
Meteorology</span>. <http://glossary.ametsoc.org/wiki/Flood>

Black, E., Blackburn, M., Harrison, R. G., Hoskins, B. J., Methven, J.,
2004. <span>Factors contributing to the summer 2003 European
heatwave</span>. Weather 59 (8), 217–223.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1256/wea.74.04>

Bond, N. A., Cronin, M. F., Freeland, H., Mantua, N., 2015. <span>Causes
and impacts of the 2014 warm anomaly in the NE Pacific</span>.

Castillo, K. D., Lima, F. P., 2010. <span>Comparison of in situ and
satellite-derived (MODIS-Aqua/Terra) methods for assessing temperatures
on coral reefs</span>. Limnology and Oceanography Methods 8, 107–117.
<papers3://publication/uuid/214CBD69-72B9-42FC-8EBF-00467926F564>

Chen, K., Gawarkiewicz, G., Kwon, Y.-O., Zhang, W. G., 2015. <span>The
role of atmospheric forcing versus ocean advection during the extreme
warming of the Northeast U.S. continental shelf in 2012</span>. Journal
of Geophysical Research: Oceans 120, 1–16.

Chen, K., Gawarkiewicz, G. G., Lentz, S. J., Bane, J. M., 2014.
<span>Diagnosing the warming of the Northeastern U.S. Coastal Ocean in
2012: A linkage between the atmospheric jet stream variability and ocean
response</span>. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans 119 (1),
218–227.

Crisp, D. J., 1964. <span>The effects of the severe winter of 1962-63 on
marine life in Britain</span>. Journal of Animal Ecology 33 (1),
165–210. <http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/2355>

DeCastro, M., G<span>õ</span>mez-Gesteira, M., Costoya, X., Santos, F.,
2014. <span>Upwelling influence on the number of extreme hot SST days
along the Canary upwelling ecosystem</span>. Journal of Geophysical
Research: Oceans 119 (5), 3029–3040.

Diaz, R., Rosenberg, R., 2008. <span>Spreading dead zones and
consequences for marine ecosystems.</span> Science 321 (5891), 926–929.
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18703733>

Easterling, D. R., Meehl, G. A., Parmesan, C., Changnon, S. A., Karl,
T. R., Mearns, L. O., 2000. <span>Climate Extremes: observations,
modeling, and impacts</span>. Science 289 (5487), 2068–2074.
<http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/doi/10.1126/science.289.5487.2068>

Ellis, J. M., 2015. <span>A Quantitative Assessment of the January 2010
Cold Spell Effect on Mangrove Utilizing Coral Reef Fishes from Biscayne
National Park, Florida</span>.
[http://nsuworks.nova.edu/occ{\_}stuetd/377/](http://nsuworks.nova.edu/occ{_}stuetd/377/)

Feng, M., McPhaden, M. J., Xie, S.-P., Hafner, J., 2013. <span>La
Ni<span>ñ</span>a forces unprecedented Leeuwin Current warming in
2011.</span> Scientific reports 3, 1277.
[http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=3572450{&}tool=pmcentrez{&}rendertype=abstract](http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=3572450{&}tool=pmcentrez{&}rendertype=abstract)

Firth, L. B., Knights, A. M., Bell, S. S., 2011. <span>Air temperature
and winter mortality: Implications for the persistence of the invasive
mussel, Perna viridis in the intertidal zone of the south-eastern United
States</span>. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology
400 (1-2), 250–256.

Firth, L. B., Mieszkowska, N., Grant, L. M., Bush, L. E., Davies, A. J.,
Frost, M. T., Moschella, P. S., Burrows, M. T., Cunningham, P. N., Dye,
S. R., Hawkins, S. J., 2015. <span>Historical comparisons reveal
multiple drivers of decadal change of an ecosystem engineer at the range
edge</span>. Ecology and Evolution 5 (15), 3210–3222.

Fischer, E. M., Lawrence, D. M., Sanderson, B. M., 2011.
<span>Quantifying uncertainties in projections of extremes - a perturbed
land surface parameter experiment</span>. Climate Dynamics 37 (7-8),
1381–1398.

Fischer, E. M., Sch<span>ä</span>r, C., 2010. <span>Consistent
geographical patterns of changes in high-impact European
heatwaves</span>. Nature Geoscience 3 (6), 398–403.
<http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/ngeo866>

Garrabou, J., Coma, R., Bensoussan, N., Bally, M.,
Chevaldonn<span>é</span>, P., Cigliano, M., Diaz, D., Harmelin, J. G.,
Gambi, M. C., Kersting, D. K., Ledoux, J. B., Lejeusne, C., Linares, C.,
Marschal, C., P<span>é</span>rez, T., Ribes, M., Romano, J. C., Serrano,
E., Teixido, N., Torrents, O., Zabala, M., Zuberer, F., Cerrano, C.,
2009. <span>Mass mortality in Northwestern Mediterranean rocky benthic
communities: Effects of the 2003 heat wave</span>. Global Change Biology
15 (5), 1090–1103.

Gershunov, A., Douville, H., 2008. <span>Extensive summer hot and cold
extremes under current and possible future climatic conditions: Europe
and North America</span>. In: Climate Extremes and Society. pp. 74–98.

Gunter, G., 1941. <span>Death of Fishes Due to Cold on the Texas Coast,
January, 1940</span>. Ecology 22 (2), 203–208.
<http://www.esajournals.org/doi/abs/10.2307/1932218>

Gunter, G., 1951. <span>Destruction of Fishes and Other Organisms on the
South Texas Coast by the Cold Wave of January 28-February 3,
1951</span>. Ecology 32 (4), 731–736.

Hobday, A. J., Alexander, L. V., Perkins, S. E., Smale, D. A., Straub,
S. C., Oliver, E. C., Benthuysen, J. A., Burrows, M. T., Donat, M. G.,
Feng, M., Holbrook, N. J., Moore, P. J., Scannell, H. A., <span>Sen
Gupta</span>, A., Wernberg, T., feb 2016. <span>A hierarchical approach
to defining marine heatwaves</span>. Progress in Oceanography 141,
227–238.
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0079661116000057>

Holt, S. A., Holt, G. J., 1983. <span>Cold Death of Fishes at Port
Aransas, Texas: January 1982</span>. The Southwestern Naturalist 28 (4),
464–466 CR – Copyright <span>&</span><span>\#</span>169; 1983
Southwestern A. <http://www.jstor.org/stable/3670832>

Hutchings, L., van der Lingen, C. D., Shannon, L. J., Crawford, R.
J. M., Verheye, H. M. S., Bartholomae, C. H., van der Plas, a. K., Louw,
D., Kreiner, a., Ostrowski, M., Fidel, Q., Barlow, R. G., Lamont, T.,
Coetzee, J., Shillington, F., Veitch, J., Currie, J. C., Monteiro, P.
M. S., 2009. <span>The Benguela Current: An ecosystem of four
components</span>. Progress in Oceanography 83 (1-4), 15–32.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pocean.2009.07.046>

Jentsch, A., Kreyling, J., Beierkuhnlein, C., 2007. <span>A New
Generation of Climate-Change Experiments: Events, Not Trends</span>
9295 (November 2015).

Kreyling, J., Beierkuhnlein, C., Ellis, L., Jentsch, A., 2008.
<span>Invasibility of grassland and heath communities exposed to extreme
weather events - Additive effects of diversity resistance and
fluctuating physical environment</span>. Oikos 117 (10), 1542–1554.

Laboy-nieves, E. N., Klein, E., Conde, J. E., Losada, F., Cruz, J. J.,
Bone, D., 2001. <span>Mass mortality of tropical marine communities in
Morrocoy.pdf</span>. Bulletin of Marine Science 68 (2), 163–179.

Lima, F. P., Wethey, D. S., 2012. <span>Three decades of high-resolution
coastal sea surface temperatures reveal more than warming</span>. Nature
Communications 3, 704.
[http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22426225\$\\backslash\$nhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ncomms1713](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22426225$\backslash$nhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ncomms1713)

L<span>ü</span>nning, K., 1990. <span>Seaweds: their environment,
biogeography and ecophysiology. Jhon Wiley and Sons</span>. Wiley, New
York (USA).
[http://scholar.google.co.za.ezproxy.ukzn.ac.za:2048/scholar?hl=en{&}q=Satellite+versus+in+situ+measurements+at+the+air?sea+interface{&}btnG={&}as{\_}sdt=1,5{&}as{\_}sdtp=
  https://scholar.google.com.br/scholar?q=L{\\"{u}}nning+1990{&}btnG={&}hl=pt-BR{&}as{\_}sdt=0,5{\#}0](http://scholar.google.co.za.ezproxy.ukzn.ac.za:2048/scholar?hl=en{&}q=Satellite+versus+in+situ+measurements+at+the+air?sea+interface{&}btnG={&}as{_}sdt=1,5{&}as{_}sdtp=
  https://scholar.google.com.br/scholar?q=L{\"{u}}nning+1990{&}btnG={&}hl=pt-BR{&}as{_}sdt=0,5{#}0)

Lutjeharms, J. R. E., Cooper, J., Roberts, M., 2000. <span>Upwelling at
the inshore edge of the Agulhas Current</span>. Continental Shelf
Research 20 (7), 737–761.
[http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0278434399000928
  papers3://publication/uuid/8AEE7760-040F-4E0E-AE8A-FA07C224DFA4](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0278434399000928
  papers3://publication/uuid/8AEE7760-040F-4E0E-AE8A-FA07C224DFA4)

Mackenzie, B. R., Schiedek, D., 2007. <span>Daily ocean monitoring since
the 1860s shows record warming of northern European seas</span>. Global
Change Biology 13 (7), 1335–1347.

Marsh, H., O’Shea, T. J., Best, R. C., 1986. <span>Research on
Sirenians</span>. Ambio 15 (3), 177–180.
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/4313244>

Matthes, H., Rinke, A., Dethloff, K., 2015. <span>Recent changes in
Arctic temperature extremes: warm and cold spells during winter and
summer</span>. Environmental Research Letters 10 (11), 114020.
<http://stacks.iop.org/1748-9326/10/i=11/a=114020?key=crossref.943405a086c6db32f307f68ffb159afd>

Meehl, G. a., 2004. <span>More Intense, More Frequent, and Longer
Lasting Heat Waves in the 21st Century</span>. Science 305 (5686),
994–997. <http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/doi/10.1126/science.1098704>

Mills, K. E., Pershing, A. J., Brown, C. J., Chen, Y., Chiang, F.-S.,
Holland, D. S., Lehuta, S., Nye, J. a., Sun, J. C., Thomas, A. C.,
Wahle, R. a., 2012. <span>Lessons From the 2012 Ocean Heat Wave in the
Northwest Atlantic</span>. Oceanography 26 (2), 60–64.

Olita, A., Sorgente, R., Natale, S., Gaber<span>š</span>ek, S., Ribotti,
A., Bonanno, A., Patti, B., 2007. <span>Effects of the 2003 European
heatwave on the Central Mediterranean Sea: surface fluxes and the
dynamical response</span>. Ocean Science 3 (2), 273–289.
<http://www.ocean-sci.net/3/273/2007/os-3-273-2007.html>

O’Shea, T. J., Beck, C. A., Bonde, R. K., Kochman, H. I., Odell, D. K.,
1985. <span>An analysis of manatee mortality patterns in Florida,
1976-81</span>. The Journal of Wildlife Management 49 (1), 1–11.
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/3801830>

Pachauri, R. K., Meyer, L., <span>Van Ypersele</span>, J.-P., Brinkman,
S., <span>Van Kesteren</span>, L., Leprince-Ringuet, N., <span>Van
Boxmeer</span>, F., 2014. <span>Climate Change 2014 Synthesis
Report</span>.

Pearce, A. F., Feng, M., 2013. <span>The rise and fall of the “marine
heat wave” off Western Australia during the summer of 2010/2011</span>.
Journal of Marine Systems 111-112, 139–156.

Rehage, J. S., Blanchard, J. R., Boucek, R. E., Lorenz, J. J., Robinson,
M., 2016. <span>Knocking back invasions: variable resistance and
resilience to multiple cold spells in native vs. nonnative
fishes</span>. Ecosphere 00 (00), e01268.

Reynolds, R. W., Rayner, N. A., Smith, T., 2002. <span>An improved in
situ and satellite SST analysis for climate</span>. Journal of Climate.
[http://ams.allenpress.com/perlserv/?request=get-abstract{&}doi=10.1175/1520-0442(2002)015{\\textless}1609:AIISAS{\\textgreater}2.0.CO;2
  papers3://publication/uuid/7532476F-59A5-492D-B57A-12B92961BA4C](http://ams.allenpress.com/perlserv/?request=get-abstract{&}doi=10.1175/1520-0442(2002)015{\textless}1609:AIISAS{\textgreater}2.0.CO;2
  papers3://publication/uuid/7532476F-59A5-492D-B57A-12B92961BA4C)

Reynolds, R. W., Smith, T. M., Liu, C., Chelton, D. B., Casey, K. S.,
Schlax, M. G., 2007. <span>Daily high-resolution-blended analyses for
sea surface temperature</span>. Journal of Climate 20 (22), 5473–5496.
[http://ams.allenpress.com/perlserv/?request=get-abstract{&}doi=10.1175/2007JCLI1824.1
  papers3://publication/doi/10.1175/2007JCLI1824.1](http://ams.allenpress.com/perlserv/?request=get-abstract{&}doi=10.1175/2007JCLI1824.1
  papers3://publication/doi/10.1175/2007JCLI1824.1)

Roberts, M. J., 2005. <span>Chokka squid (Loligo vulgaris reynaudii)
abundance linked to changes in South Africa’s Agulhas Bank ecosystem
during spawning and the early life cycle</span>. ICES Journal of Marine
Science 62 (1), 33–55.

Selig, E., Casey, K., Bruno, J. F., 2010. <span>New insights into global
patterns of ocean temperature anomalies: implications for coral reef
health and management</span>. Global Ecology and Biogeography
9999 (9999). <http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1466-8238.2009.00522.x>

Smale, D. A., Wernberg, T., 2009. <span>Satellite-derived SST data as a
proxy for water temperature in nearshore benthic ecology Peer reviewed
article</span>. Marine Biology 387, 27–37.
[http://www.vliz.be/imis/imis.php?refid=144063{&}pp=print
  papers3://publication/uuid/3F4EF52B-247E-4406-8AD9-419D5B46A4B5](http://www.vliz.be/imis/imis.php?refid=144063{&}pp=print
  papers3://publication/uuid/3F4EF52B-247E-4406-8AD9-419D5B46A4B5)

Smit, A. J., Roberts, M., Anderson, R. J., Dufois, F., Dudley, S. F. J.,
Bornman, T. G., Olbers, J., Bolton, J. J., 2013. <span>A coastal
seawater temperature dataset for biogeographical studies: Large biases
between in situ and remotely-sensed data sets around the coast of South
Africa</span>. PLoS ONE 8 (12).

Sura, P., 2011. <span>A general perspective of extreme events in weather
and climate</span>.

Wernberg, T., Russell, B. D., Moore, P. J., Ling, S. D., Smale, D. A.,
Campbell, A., Coleman, M. A., Steinberg, P. D., Kendrick, G. A.,
Connell, S. D., 2011. <span>Impacts of climate change in a global
hotspot for temperate marine biodiversity and ocean warming</span>.
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022098111000694>

Wernberg, T., Smale, D. A., Tuya, F., Thomsen, M. S., Langlois, T. J.,
de Bettignies, T., Bennett, S., Rousseaux, C. S., 2013. <span>An extreme
climatic event alters marine ecosystem structure in a global
biodiversity hotspot</span>. Nature Climate Change 3 (1), 78–82.
[http://www.nature.com/articles/nclimate1627
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1627](http://www.nature.com/articles/nclimate1627
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1627)

Woodward, F. I., 1987. <span>Climate and Plant Distribution</span>.
Booksgooglecom 154 (2), 174.
<http://www.cambridge.org/us/catalogue/catalogue.asp?isbn=9780521282147>
